In the last lecture, we mentioned that
checking the 2-colorability of a graph
is equivalent to checking if it's a bipartite
graph, it's what we will learn in this lecture.
Reminder that a bipartite graph is a graph
whose vertices can be partitioned into two
disjoint and independent sets, so the goal
here is to try to partition vertices and see
if it's possible to do so. To know to which
one of the two sets a vertex belongs to,
we can either use 0 and 1, or simply use colors:
red and blue for example. Let's use colors,
red vertices are the ones that belong to the first
set and blue vertices represent the second set.
The main idea we will use is that if
a vertex is assigned a certain color,
then all its neighbors must have a different
color, and because there are only two colors,
they must have the opposite color. So if a
vertex is red, all its neighbors must be blue,
and vice versa, if a vertex is blue,
then all its neighbors must be red.
To apply that, we can start from any vertex, we
color it with red for example. All its neighbors
must be blue, so we color them with blue and
traverse them. Then we alternate again, their
neighbors must be red, we color them with red
and traverse them. And so on until we color all
the graph, we get a bipartite graph, we have the
set of red vertices and the set of blue vertices.
This scenario is possible when the graph is
2-colorable, we face no problem when coloring,
we can just traverse the graph normally while
always assigning the opposite color of the
actual vertex to the neighbor. However, we can
have the case where 2 colors are not enough,
here's a small example. We decide to start
from this first vertex, we color it with red.
We could choose blue by the way, no big deal.
Now we color all its neighbors with blue and
traverse them. We start with this neighbor, it's
blue, so we must color its neighbors with red.
But wait, it has a neighbor that
is also blue, and remember that two
adjacent vertices are not allowed to have
the same color, we have a problem here.
What do we do? We turn the actual vertex to red?
No, there would be a conflict with the previous
vertex. We turn the neighbor to red? No, also a
conflict with the previous vertex. The answer is
that there's nothing to do, the graph is simply
not 2-colorable, it's not a bipartite graph.
Let's see a bigger example to better
understand. We have this graph, we can
start from any vertex and assign any color,
let's assign red. Now to traverse vertices,
we can for example use bfs. For that we need a
queue, where we store next vertices to be visited.
We traverse neighbors, we color them with the
opposite color, blue, while also enqueuing them.
We dequeue the next vertex. In its
neighbors we can find two uncolored
vertices, we color them and add them
to the queue, and one colored vertex.
But it has the opposite so no conflict, we just
don't enqueue it because it's already visited.
We dequeue the next vertex. It
has two opposite color neighbors,
and one uncolored neighbor, we color it with
the opposite color, red, and we enqueue it.
Next vertex, both neighbors are colored
with the opposite color, we do nothing.
Next vertex, same thing, neighbors all
colored with opposite color, we move on.
Next vertex, one neighbor with
opposite color, we do nothing to it,
and one uncolored neighbor, we color it
with the opposite color and we enqueue it.
Next vertex, all neighbors are colored
with the opposite color, we do nothing.
Next vertex, one uncolored neighbor, we color
it with red because the actual vertex is blue,
and we enqueue it. Next vertex,
all neighbors have opposite color.
And the queue became empty. But it doesn't mean
that we finished, we have a disconnected graph,
so we should start over from an unvisited vertex
to continue, remember the lecture about bfs.
Let's start again from N, we color it with
red. It has three uncolored neighbors,
we color them with blue and enqueue them. Next
vertex, it has one neighbor with opposite color,
two uncolored neighbors, we color them and
enqueue them, but it also has a neighbor that
has the same color. It means that the vertex
coloring isn't respected, and to respect it,
we would need a third color. We deduce that this
graph is not bipartite, it's not 2-colorable.
And as you can see, we could know it with a simple
bfs traversal, which is done in linear time.
Let's implement this algorithm. For the
implementation, we will use color_map,
a hash map where the key is a
vertex and the value is its color.
It will also serve as a visited set, because
a vertex that is not present in the color map
means that it's not visited yet, because if
it was, it would be colored. Also, because
the graph may be disconnected and our algorithm
should handle disconnected graphs, we will need
a bfs function that we will later call on each
unvisited vertex, as we did in the bfs lecture.
Let's start making it. As parameters, it needs
the graph, the vertex from where to start,
and the color map. We start by coloring the start
vertex, let's color it with red, we put 0. Note
that 0 means red and 1 means blue, it's just an
arbitrary way of labeling, we could actually write
'red' and 'blue' as strings but we can simply use
0 and 1. We also need to create a queue where we
put the start vertex. Now we can start looping, we
keep looping while the queue still has elements.
Inside the loop, we start by extracting a
vertex. And now we traverse its neighbors.
For each neighbor, we have three cases: The case
where it's uncolored, the case where it's colored
with the opposite color, and the case where it's
colored with the same color. When it's uncolored,
we color it with the opposite color and enqueue
it because it's not visited yet. When it's colored
with the opposite color, we have nothing to
do. And when it's colored with the same color,
then the graph is not bipartite, we don't need to
continue, we directly return false or something.
In code, for the first case, the condition is:
neighbor not in color_map, when we cannot find
it as a key. In that case, we assign to
it the opposite color, and we enqueue it.
The opposite color is calculated with
1-x, where x is the color of the actual
vertex. Because 1-0 is 1, and 1-1 is
0, always gives the opposite color.
For the third case we write, if
color_map[neighbor] is equal to color_map[vertex],
we return false. And nothing happens in the
second case so we don't need to add code for it.
And if we've been able to color all vertices
traversed by this bfs traversal, we return true.
Now in the is_bipartite function,
we need as parameter the graph.
It will be a boolean function that says if yes or
no it's bipartite. We start by creating the color
map, then for each unvisited vertex, we call
bfs on it to color its connected component.
If that calls returns false, then we
found a problem in that component,
the graph is not bipartite, we return false. If
we've been able to color all connected components
with no problem, then the graph is bipartite,
we return true. And we solved the problem.
Note that if we wanted to actually get the
colors of vertices and not just yes or no,
we could return the color map instead. Or
compute the two independent sets by using
the color map and return them. And the time
complexity of this algorithm is O(|V|+|E|)
because we're performing a simple bfs traversal,
we can check 2-colorability in linear time.
Okay we can check 2-colorability in linear
time, what about the general case? What
about k-colorability? Unfortunately,
2-colorability is a special case,
checking k-colorability with k greater than 2
can currently be done in exponential time only.
We will still see an algorithm
for that in the next lecture,
an algorithm where we will use
backtracking. See you in the next lecture.